# Motivation   
Adapter trimming is an essential step for analyzing small RNA sequencing data where read length is greater than that of target DNA ranging from 18 to 30 bp. Identification of adapter patterns from raw reads is labor-intensive and error-prone. Moreover, the use of randomized adapters to reduce ligation biases in the library preparation makes adapter detection even more challenging. 
   
# About FindAdapt   
FindAdapt is a Python package for identifying adapter patterns for small RNA sequencing data without dependency on prior information.   

# Installation
FindAdapt is a stand-alone Python package (python >=3.6).

## Download and uncompress
```bash
wget https://github.com/chc-code/findadapt/archive/refs/heads/master.zip
unzip master.zip  # the output folder will be findadapt-master

# use FindAdapt
cd findadapt-master
./findadapt  -h
```

To achieve the best performance, installation of pyahocorasick is highly recommended. 
```
# install pyahocorasick
pip install pyahocorasick
```

## docker image
A docker image is also available at https://hub.docker.com/r/chccode/findadapt
(`pyahocorasick` is contained, and the findadapt script is set as the entrypoint.)

```
docker pull chccode/findadapt
docker run  chccode/findadapt reads.fastq.gz  
```

 
# SYNOPSIS   

      findadapt reads.fastq.gz
      findadapt reads.fastq.gz -organism mouse
      findadapt -list_org
      
      # identify adapter sequences for all samples of a study from mice 
      findadapt -fn_fq_list fq_list.txt -organism mouse

      # trim the identified adapters using cutadapt package 
      findadapt reads.fastq.gz -pw_cutadapt path/to/cutadapt -cut  


# COMMANDS AND OPTIONS  

## File input
You can only select one option (either `-fq` or `-prj`) as the input

- `fn_fq_file`   Optional positional argument,  the path for single fastq file   
- `-fn_fq_list / -list / -l file_list`   a tab-delimited file, containing the list of fastq files. column1 = study ID, column2 = path of the fastq file. 

## Reference sequences
either a list of sequences (fasta format or one sequence per line) by '-fn_refseq' or organism name by `-organism`
- `-fn_refseq filename`   a list of sequences in fasta format or one sequence per line.   
- `-organism / -org str`   organism name (for example, human, mouse, fruitfly, worm, arabidopsis, rice);  default: human.  Alternatively, the miRBase prefix, such hsa, mmu, dme, cel, ath, osa; or, if -fn_refseq is specified, you can specify as other
- `-list_org`  list the supported organisms 


## Output options   
- `-o prefix`,str, optional, the prefix for the output results, if not specified, will infer from the input file
- `-quiet / -q` , toggle, suppress the pyahocorasick not installed warning
- `-cut / -cutadapt/ -trim`  flag,  run the cutadapt process; require the cutadapt already installed and available in PATH   
- `-pw_cutadapt str`  the path of cutadapt, the default is from PATH   
- `-v / -verbose` flag, display the log information in the terminal   
   
   
## Other Options
- `-expected_adapter_len int`  expected adapter length to discover, by default, 12 nt   
- `-max_random_linker int`   max allowed random seqence length, default = 8
- `-nreads int`  max reads number used to find adapter, default is 1 million, if use all reads, set as -1
- `-nsam int`  for studies with multiple samples/fastq files, by default, will use first 5 files to infer the adapter pattern for this study. You can change the number by this parameter. If you need to use all samples, set as -1   
- `-thres_multiplier float`    the multiplier threshold for accepting an extra random base from a lower phase. e.g for 2 possible (3p-random_sequence_lengh, adapter_seq) : (0, seq1), (1, seq2), the reads supporting each combination is n1 and n2 respectively,  (1, seq2) will only be accepted if n2 > n1 * thres_multiplier. this argument is to avoid the including, default=1.2

- `-min_reads int`  minimum matched reads number for infering per fastq file, default=30, if lower than this value, the adapter inferring step will be skip, you may need to check the reference settings.   
- `-threads / -cpu int` the threads to use, by default = 5. Usually, the performance won't improve greatly when more than 5 threads are used (refer to the manuscript for detail)   
- `-enough_reads int` enough matched reads number for infering per fastq file, after reaching, will stop reading the raw fastq file, default=1000   
- `-f`  `-force`  flag, force rerun the analysis, ignoring the exisiting parsed reads,  can be useful when use a new reference.   


# Examples   
   
We provided several fastq files from three studies   
1. GSE106303, the adapter sequence is not specified in the GEO database or the literature  
2. GSE122068, generated by NextFLEX library preparation kit where reads  have 4N random sequence at both the 5' and 3' ends 
3. GSE137617, generated by SMARTer library preparation kit where multiple (usually 3 nt) random bps at the 5' end and polyA as the 3' adapter sequence
   
To identify adapter sequences  
`./findadapt <fn_fq>`   
   
 for example, GSE122068.nextflex.SRR8144939.truncated.fastq.gz   
 `./findadapt ./demo/GSE122068.nextflex.SRR8144939.truncated.fastq.gz`   

 # Output Format
 ## log information
 ```
 2023-09-08 08:13:02  INFO   <module>              line: 1683   1/1: single - using 1/ 1 fq files
2023-09-08 08:13:02  INFO   get_adapter_per_prj   line: 1076   	processing GSE122068.nextflex.SRR8144939.truncated.fastq.gz
2023-09-08 08:13:02  INFO   get_parsed_reads      line: 834    matched reads found: 1177
2023-09-08 08:13:02  INFO   export_data           line: 1229   	most possible kit = NEXTflex
2023-09-08 08:13:02  INFO   export_data           line: 1289   result per-prj = GSE122068.nextflex.SRR8144939.truncated.adapter.txt
2023-09-08 08:13:02  INFO   export_data           line: 1290   result per-fq = GSE122068.nextflex.SRR8144939.truncated.per_fq.adapter.txt
```
## .adapter.txt
The output contains the following columns
**Prj**: The output prefix, if the input is a single fastq file rather than a fastq file list (-fn_fq_list), it will be "single"
**total_reads**: Total matched reads used for adapter identification
**3p_seq**:  The sequence of 3' adapter
**3p_phase**: the random sequence length before 3' adapter
**3p_count / 3p_reatio**: The number and ratio of reads supporting this 3' adapter sequence and random sequence length
**5p_phase**:  the random sequence length before the insert
**5p_count / 5p_ratio**:  The number and ratio of reads supporting this 5' random sequence length 
**err**:  the error information if fail to get the adapter sequence, 

You can remove the adapter using the identified pattern by specifying `-cut` 
Or use the output to build your own cutadapt command.

```
# if 3p_seq is empty and 5p_phase > 0:
{pw_cutadapt} -u {5p_phase} -m 15 -j 8  --trim-n {fn_fq} -o {fn_out}

# elif 3p seq is not empty and 5p_phase = 3p_phase = 0
{pw_cutadapt} -a {seq_3p} -m 15 -j 8  --trim-n  {fn_fq} -o {fn_out}

# if 3p_phase > 0 and 5p_phase == 0
{pw_cutadapt} -a {seq_3p} -j 8 --trim-n  {fn_fq} |cutadapt -u -{3p_phase} -m 15 -o {fn_out}

# if 3p_phase = 0 and 5p_phase > 0
{pw_cutadapt} -a {seq_3p} -j 8 --trim-n  {fn_fq} |cutadapt -u {5p_phase} -m 15 -o {fn_out}

# if 3p_phase > 0 and 5p_phase > 0
{pw_cutadapt} -a {seq_3p} -j 8 --trim-n  {fn_fq} |cutadapt -u -{3p_phase} -u {5p_phase} -m 15 -o {fn_out}
```


| prj    | total_reads | 3p_seq       | 3p_phase | 3p_count | 3p_ratio | 5p_phase | 5p_count | 5p_ratio | err |
|--------|-------------|--------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|-----|
| single | 1177        | TGGAATTCTCGG | 4        | 1021     | 0.8667   | 4        | 1143     | 0.9711   |


## .per_fq.adapter.txt
The detail adaoter information of every input fastq file

| prj    | fastq                                   | total_reads | side | sn | seq          | phase | count | ratio  |
|--------|-----------------------------------------|-------------|------|----|--------------|-------|-------|--------|
| single | GSE122068.nextflex.SRR8144939.truncated | 1177        | 3p   | 1  | TGGAATTCTCGG | 4     | 1021  | 0.8675 |
| single | GSE122068.nextflex.SRR8144939.truncated | 1177        | 3p   | 2  | CTGGAATTCTCG | 3     | 633   | 0.5378 |
| single | GSE122068.nextflex.SRR8144939.truncated | 1177        | 5p   | 1  |              | 4     | 1143  | 0.9711 |

